---
layout: post
title:  "Coding: A Reflection on Creation"
date:   2015-06-21
categories: reflection
---

#Coding: A Reflection on Creation

A few days into class I noticed that my teacher in coding used the word "create" a lot.  We create programs, we create classes, we create methods, create, create, create.  It got me thinking about the notion of creation.  Specifically, why do we create things, what does it mean to create, and what is a creator?  A further question that kept coming up is, what does it mean to create something with free will (or that can deviate) from the intentions of the creator?  Here's my foray into these questions.

##What does it mean to create? and Why do we create?

These two questions seemed intertwined to me so I thought I'd tackle them together.  As coders, we create code to achieve some desired end.  In the end, it all boils down to writing a program that either stores data in some way, or runs some sophisticated set of algorithms on the data (maybe not so sophisticated in my case) to achieve a purpose.  We write "code" to do "things." We create so that our creations achieve a desired end.  We make sure that there is a structure to the program so that when it gets "A", it returns a desired "B."  Contrast this thinking with that of a writer.  Specifically a writer who writes things that no one else will ever read or even see.  Since this writer's work will not achieve a tangible "end", is he/she any less a creator?  I would argue no, that in fact this writer's work is achieving it's desired end even though no one else even knows it exists.  In the writer's case the desired end is the writing itself, for the writing itself is an expression of the writer's own thoughts, feelings, and desires.  And that expression is itself a creation.  Have you ever had a piece of code/program that you just had to test out even though it what completely useless?  If so, welcome to the life of the starving artist.  Keep in mind though, that the writer just like the "coder" needs to add some type of structure to his/her thoughts, feelings, and desires, for it to be creative.  It's not enough to just have a thought (I think about story lines all the time but have very few actual created stories).  Creation of something requires that structure be imposed just in the same way a "coder" will impose structure/logic upon his/her program.  So what does it mean to create?  I would say that to create is to express our thoughts/feelings/desires in some structured form.  Why do we create?  To achieve some desired end.

##What does it mean to be a creator?
Given our definition of creation, a creator would need to be an existing thing that creates.  Or has thoughts/feelings/desires (an interior) that it can express and structure.  Who is the "coder" creator, the person who has a desired end they wish to achieve and can impose a logical structure in a given form "code" to achieve that end.  A writer does the same thing, just with the written word.  The musician does the same thing with music, the painter with paint, etc.  The imporant pieces here are not how the person creates but the two constants:  (an interior) and structure.  And this (interior) structure doesn't even need to be recognizable to another person either.  My wife looks at the code I write and has no idea what's going on, that doesn't make it any less a creation.  The mere fact that it is an expression of my own (interior) with my own imposed structure makes it my own creation.  Stretch that to a person who's only form of writing is scribbles.  While we may not be able to interpret what (interior) that person is trying to express, it is no way any less a creation than a movie/book/etc. that we all find enjoyable.  

##What would it be like to create something with free will?
What if your program could make a choice while it was running?  Not the kind of pseudo choice your program does *random* but the kind of choice that happens when you come to a fork in the road and you go left and not right (or you choose to say and finish your coding work when everyone else is headed for the bar). The kind of choice that leaves the "end" for which your wrote your program up for grabs because the logical structure you imposed on it can now be thrown out the window.  For a real world example of this, try getting a four year old girl dressed and ready for the morning (thanks Maria) and see what happens with your perfect program.  What if your creations were just as unruly?  How would that change you as the creator?  Would you grow to love your creations even more, or despise them for the pain they've put you through?  Questions for another time...

##Questions to reflect on:
1.  Are we an instance of creation?
2.  For those who said yes to #1, why?  And before you answer because it's in the Bible, go back to Genesis and reread all that goes on there in Creation.  There is so much more if you really ponder/pray about it.
3.  For who who said no, why not?  If we ourselves are not created, where does our creative nature come from?  For that matter, where does our existence come from?
4.  If we as humans are free, free to choose, free to create, how does that free will affect creation? 
